TTS finetune changes (#175)
nvidia-riva/tutorials: tts-dataset-recording-at-home.md

# Guidelines to Record a TTS Dataset at Home

This section describes best practices for getting the best audio quality when recording TTS data at home.

> ## What data?

Reviewer: Or rename to Dataset.  Trying to be consistent across all tutorials.

Start by recording the [harvard sentences](http://www.cs.cmu.edu/afs/cs.cmu.edu/project/fgdata/OldFiles/Recorder.app/utterances/Type1/harvsents.txt), which should produce about 20 to 40 minutes of usable data for TTS.

> ## What gear?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Hardware Requirements
```

Reviewer: Trying to be consistent across all tutorials.  We don't use the term gear.

> * Use a decent cheap microphone like the [Audio-Technica AT2020USB+](https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B00B5ZX9FM/ref=ppx_yo_dt_b_asin_title_o00_s00?ie=UTF8&psc=1) or the [blue yeti usb mic](https://www.amazon.com/Blue-Yeti-USB-Microphone-Silver/dp/B002VA464S).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Use a microphone like the [Audio-Technica AT2020USB+](https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B00B5ZX9FM/ref=ppx_yo_dt_b_asin_title_o00_s00?ie=UTF8&psc=1) or the [Blue Yeti USB mic](https://www.amazon.com/Blue-Yeti-USB-Microphone-Silver/dp/B002VA464S).
```

* Get a boom filter or windscreen.

> ## What audio recording software?

Reviewer: please reword so this is not a question

This document focuses on [Audacity](https://www.audacityteam.org/): it’s free, and it has a db meter and shortcuts for making recording easy.

> [Reaper](https://www.reaper.fm/) is also quite good but not yet covered on this document.

Reviewer: please delete if we don't recommend

Author: we do recommend this (highly) but don't yet have a full tutorial for it

<u>Do not use software that does not have a numbered db meter.</u>

> ## How to set up for recording?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Recording Prerequisites
```

    
3.  Select your audio interface.
    
<img width="1000" alt="image" src="https://github.com/mgrafu/tutorials/assets/47233618/7874fef9-4e34-400b-9e0c-2bd8a734111e">
    
    
4.  Set the bit depth to 24-bit preferably or 16-bit.
    
<img width="1000" alt="image" src="https://github.com/mgrafu/tutorials/assets/47233618/d3eb72fa-2842-49bb-93d1-a0d09f29c4a7">
    
    
5.  Set the sampling rate to 96 kHz preferably or 44 kHz.
    
<img width="1000" alt="image" src="https://github.com/mgrafu/tutorials/assets/47233618/c0067a97-3425-472e-8580-4e2648d3b894">
    
    
6.  On the microphone, set the microphone pattern to **Cardioid** if you have that option.
    
<img width="450" alt="image" src="https://github.com/mgrafu/tutorials/assets/47233618/6e5e7a0e-ab58-41fc-8c11-be6921642f52"> <img width="455" alt="image" src="https://github.com/mgrafu/tutorials/assets/47233618/bb834106-ac03-4eb5-91dd-eb4d1918234a">
    
  
7.  Set up the boom filter or windscreen.
    
<img width="450" alt="image" src="https://github.com/mgrafu/tutorials/assets/47233618/c08c2fbd-0f3d-46e9-aa92-f51519d183d6">
    
    
8.  Select the most quiet room in your environment, and close your windows and doors.
    

> 9.  Eliminate external sources of noise, e. g. air conditioning, computer fan, kids, etc...

Reviewer: ```suggestion
9.  Eliminate external sources of noise, for example, air conditioning, computer fan, and so on.
```

> ## How to adjust microphone levels and body position before recording?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Adjusting the Microphone Level and Body Position Before Recording
```

> 1.  Set your microphone gain to ‘9 hours.’

Reviewer 2: `9 hours.` is there a typo here?

    
2.  Press the recording button on Audacity.
    
3.  Make sure you’re talking onto the side of the microphone that has the brand logo.
    
<img width="450" alt="image" src="https://github.com/mgrafu/tutorials/assets/47233618/700927ca-1a40-4a30-938a-b6330dba3a85">
    
      
4.  Position yourself at least a fist away from the microphone and no more than a foot away.
    
<img width="450" alt="image" src="https://github.com/mgrafu/tutorials/assets/47233618/ee03a9ea-2207-48a5-85ae-0f7a939c066e">
    
    
5.  Speak into the microphone with the voice you will use during the TTS data recording.
    
6.  Adjust the [microphone gain](https://www.homemusicstudio1.com/how-to-set-recording-levels/) to optimize the signal to noise ratio:
    
- If you’re recording with 24-bit, make sure the db meter is hitting between -24 db and -6 db while you’re recording.
    
<img width="1000" alt="image" src="https://github.com/mgrafu/tutorials/assets/47233618/21a99b40-523a-423b-8cd0-15ffd7dc7f8d">
    
    
    
- If you’re recording with 16-bit, make sure the db meter is between -12 db and -6 db while you’re recording.
    
7.  Do not change the microphone gain after you’ve adjusted it.
    

> ## What happens if you position yourself just right, too far or too close?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Positioning Yourself Just Right, Too Far or Too Close
```

- **1 fist away (just right)** – no distortions, minimal room sound, good signal to noise ratio.
    
<img width="1000" alt="image" src="https://github.com/mgrafu/tutorials/assets/47233618/1bb0dec4-2b35-4d35-8db2-e4a572ed6992">
    

    
- **1 inch away** – muffled (proximity effect) and distortion from plosives like /b/ and /p/.
    
<img width="1000" alt="image" src="https://github.com/mgrafu/tutorials/assets/47233618/cb082600-7323-4e39-9e3b-4b68a62f29a5">
    

    
- **2 feet away** – lots of room sound and bad signal-to-noise ratio.
    
<img width="1000" alt="image" src="https://github.com/mgrafu/tutorials/assets/47233618/3851e09e-b62b-4e71-8a3c-dda3ec65892b">

> ## How to record the TTS data?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Recording the TTS Data
```

1.  Prepare your script such that you can easily read it.
    

> 2.  Press Shift+R to record into a new track, read the first sentence, and press space bar to stop recording.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2.  Press **Shift+R** to record into a new track, read the first sentence, and press space bar to stop recording.
```

    
3.  Repeat Step 2 for each sentence in your dataset until you have completed the recording of the last one.
    

> 4.  Export all files by clicking on File –> Export –> Export Multiple...

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4.  Export all files by clicking on **File** > **Export** > **Export Multiple...**.
```
